the megalodon shark roamed the oceans
scaring and chewing everything to pieces
long after the dinosaurs were wiped out
by the great meteorite
we know that it was the largest and most
brutal predator that ever lived
as well as the biggest shark it was the
king of all seas
swimming freely between most parts of
the ocean but then
about two and a half million years ago
the last of its kind
disappeared from earth forever leaving
only their huge
teeth to be found by modern
archaeologists
at first scientists thought it was a
mass marine extinction
that happened around the time that
caused the megalodon to expire
they believe a supernova exploded some
150 light years from earth
and its radiation reached our planet
changing its climate
well this could have happened when a
star explodes it gives off so much
energy that it goes for hundreds
and even thousands of light years in all
directions if some of that heat struck
our planet
it could have warmed it up making life
impossible for lots of animal species
including the megalodon but then in
2019 a group of researchers found
something weird
the fossils left over from the monster
sharks dated back to an
earlier period that could mean they went
extinct before the supernova
a new explanation had to be devised and
it came from an unexpected source
the great white sharks at the peak of
their evolutionary career
the megalodons were apex predators
meaning they had
no rivals among the other ocean hunters
their favorite prey were whales and
other marine mammals
and they could even hunt down smaller
sharks not only were they huge
reaching over 60 feet in length and 50
tons in weight
but they also had the strongest bite in
the world
nothing that had a fight with a meg
could go away unscathed
an important note most of what we know
about the megalodon comes from their
teeth
because they were the only bony remains
left after their extinction
sharks are mostly cartilage so they have
little bone in their skeleton lots of
cartilage makes them agile and flexible
as well as allows them to open their
mouths to enormous width
at some point sharks also develop
protruding jaws to have a better grip on
their prey
something most obvious in the modern
goblin shark their teeth however
had to be tougher than cartilage so they
evolved into
a sort of tooth factory sharks have rows
upon rows of pointy sharp teeth
usually directed inwards like hooks
which get worn out pretty quickly
then when no longer needed they fall off
making way for new ones
a single shark can replace all the teeth
in its jaws
as many as 50 times in its lifetime now
the megalodon
is usually described as a sort of
gigantic version of a great white shark
this is a common mistake though made
because they were thought to be related
in fact the mag looked more like a
modern bull shark
it had a short snout a flat lower jaw
and long and massive pectoral fins that
supported its weight
and what's more important the ancestors
of today's great whites
existed at the same time as the
megalodon
with great size comes great clumsiness
though
although the mag was huge and powerful
it was also
not as nimble as the smaller and quicker
great white sharks
researchers believe that great whites
actually rivaled with the megalodon for
food and were often more successful
hunters thanks to their agility
they couldn't fight the meg openly but
were fast enough to get the prey the meg
had marked for itself
and steal it there's currently a very
limited amount of megalodon fossils
shark skeletons are made of cartilage
which doesn't fossilize very well
so that means almost all that remains of
the mighty meg are its teeth
which have been found on every continent
except for
asia and antarctica given that its
fossilized teeth are everywhere
scientists have gathered that the
megalodon traveled throughout the world
using these fossils as a guide
scientists have tried to put a picture
together of what this giant predator
actually looked
like and how it lived many of the
fossils have been found on
shark tooth hill near bakersfield
california this is a popular site where
people can dig for teeth
while wearing protective gloves although
some shark teeth have been buried for
ages they can still be sharp enough to
cut through the skin
speaking of teeth the name itself says
it all
megalodon means big tooth most of its
teeth were about four to five inches
long
but the largest tooth ever found was
7.48 inches
and it was discovered in peru with a
rare size like that
these fossils can be very valuable a
7-inch high-quality megalodon tooth can
be sold for up to fifty thousand dollars
but if you have a small tooth in your
collection don't expect to get a large
amount of cash for it
small megalodon teeth tend to be valued
quite low
those teeth weren't just super massive
in order to feast
regularly on large prey the meg had an
impressive set of 276 feet
that sat in five rows in its mouth most
fossilized teeth that have been
recovered show a significant amount of
wear on the tips
and some have had the tips completely
broken off from biting on the bones of
its prey
all those teeth arranged in five rows
served as a backup system
so that the megalodon would never run
out as soon as it lost a tooth
another one would replace it within 48
hours
that way this massive predator could
feed his insatiable appetite
and munch on prey nonstop
megalodons also had an incredible sense
of smell
it's often said that sharks can smell a
drop of blood across the ocean
this is not a myth it's true though it's
a little exaggerated
sharks have a great sense of smell and
they can detect blood from a quarter of
a mile away
so before you go swimming make sure you
have no open wounds or scratches
this will not only protect you but also
other people swimming on the beach
when a megalodon picks up the smell of
blood it switches
to hunting mode from this point on the
shark probably won't be scared away by
anything now take a look at this fishing
glitter
it shines and flashes with different
colors like other fish
a megalodon would probably pay attention
to this kind of stuff
so take off all your jewelry before you
go swimming
otherwise you might just become the
human version
of fishing glitter imagine that you're
scuba diving
and you're looking at a beautiful coral
reef colorful fish are swimming all
around
then suddenly all the reef dwelling
folks swim off or hide
within a second the reef is empty this
is a clear sign
that a large predator has appeared
somewhere nearby
and the words big predator in the
aquatic world
mean only one thing a shark
so get out of there
here's the best way to protect yourself
from a megalodon attack
it's the simplest and most obvious one
but people still ignore it
that's right it's a sign if you go to
the beach and see a shark sign
don't even think about going in the
water they're already there
and they're just waiting for someone to
dive in
but let's imagine that you've ignored
all the warnings and signs and decided
to go swimming
you suddenly hear people screaming from
the beach someone spotted a giant fin
poking out of the water
the fin is moving in your direction and
you need to decide what to do
so how can you protect yourself if the
megalodon attacks you
first of all stay calm yes i know we're
talking about a giant shark
but if you start panicking and hitting
the water with your hands
it'll only attract its attention try to
reach a boat or a group of people
do it as calmly as possible if you're
completely alone
you could try not moving at all usually
sharks try to bite people if it's a
regular shark
there's a chance it won't be too serious
once it's had a taste
the normal shark will probably decide to
leave you alone that's right
they actually don't find us very
appetizing
but you won't have this kind of luck
with a megalodon
its jaws are so big that it can swallow
you whole
so staying put is not an option
but if you encounter a megalodon in
shallow water
you still have a chance of surviving
because it's so enormous
the meg has problems maneuvering
especially in this kind of water
so if it misses with its first strike
it'll have to make a second run at you
just like a pilot trying to land a plane
this will give you time to get to the
shore
and to safety this is going to be a very
unusual match
but i bet it'll also be spectacular and
intense
in the left corner we have megalodon
this species went extinct about 3
million years ago
but there are good reasons why it's now
a legendary animal
it's the biggest shark that ever existed
and it was a super powerful predator in
its time
and a round of applause for our
contender in the right corner
titana boa this one's way bigger than
any other snake
it lives in the swamps of colombia and
it's the real boss of the area
titanoboa can eat absolutely any animal
it decides to hunt
and it faces no competition it can
swallow a giant
turtle or even a crocodile it looks like
a modern boa
but behaves like an anaconda and that's
a very scary mix but can it stop a giant
shark
let's start by looking at their sizes we
still don't know about megalodon's exact
size
because the only remains of them that
have survived are just fossilized
backbones and teeth
but scientists generally think this
monster was about 50 feet long
so it wasn't just the biggest shark that
ever existed
but also one of the biggest fish of its
time its closest rival is the modern
whale shark
but they're only about 40 feet
the giant titanoboa got so big thanks to
a lucky coincidence
snakes are cold-blooded animals so they
need a warm climate to live and grow in
northeastern colombia is perfect it was
about 90 degrees when titanoboa was
alive
this helped it grow to an incredible 42
feet in length
titanoboa could easily swallow the
longest snake registered in the guinness
book of records
which is only about 25 feet long and
that's a big
gulp so we have 50 feet versus 42
the first point goes to meglodon
what about weight titanoboa is about
2500 pounds
that's heavier than a small car
including the passengers
but it might be even heavier if you run
into titanoboa
after it's had lunch in that case you
can add a few hundred pounds more from
the turtle
or the alligator that it just swallowed
if you put titanoboa on some very
large scales you'd need five giant
anacondas on the other side to balance
them out
but megalodon is an incredible 50 times
heavier than titanoboa
the average adult female weighs between
and 59 tons that's as much as an empty
boeing 737 airplane
and that's without carry-on luggage
either luckily enough
megalodon can't fly so obviously
megalodon wins in the weight category
that's one more point to the ancient
shark although having such a large
weight makes it difficult for the shark
to move
and also means it's a little clumsy
which leads us to our next category
speed and agility megalodon can swim at
about 16 feet per second
that's enough to make it the ultimate
predator but
it's still slower than plenty of other
species if megalodon was swimming in a
pool
and usain bolt was running along next to
it he would be twice as fast
his top speed is almost 40 feet per
second
now a sailfish which is the fastest sea
creature can reach about 100 feet per
second
megalodon's size and weight make it turn
really slowly
just the same as a large truck so when
it attacks
the shark has only one chance to strike
if it misses
it has to go around for a second attempt
this gives its prey
more than enough time to run away
titanoboa isn't that fast either
especially on land but when the giant
snake is in the water
it can swim at a speed of up to 12 miles
per hour
not much but enough for it to escape
from megalodon if it needs to
it's learned to swim so well because
water is its main hunting ground
and because titanoboa is a snake duh
it also has incredible mobility it can
wriggle around
and change direction very quickly so it
can easily dodge
megalodon's bite so here's the first
point for titanoboa
the score is two to one in favor of
megalodon
next section fighting skills megalodon
is incredibly
smart it can change tactics depending on
what kind of prey it's hunting
scientists have found teeth markings
from megalodon on some whale fossils
these show that the giant sharks aim
their bites at their prey's vital body
parts
to take them out quickly other remains
of megalodon's victims have multiple
fractures
this is because megalodon performs a
super powerful ram attack
that can knock almost anything out in
fact
this 50-ton beast can easily smash
through concrete walls
so megalodon's opponents don't really
stand a chance
some of them prefer to first damage the
tails and fins of the whale they're
hunting
this stops it from escaping letting the
huge predator
finish off its defenseless victim now
what can titanoboa do in response
the giant snake isn't poisonous but this
doesn't stop it from hunting prey up to
four meters long
its bite has a very special design the
structure of its teeth and jaws
lets titanoboa really clamp down on the
body of its prey
so there's no escape when hunting
titanoboa uses similar tactics to an
anaconda
or a boa by that i mean it uses its
powerful muscles and weight to stop its
prey from moving
it deploys all of its strength to take
away the animal's energy
making it helpless so titanoboa is not
only really speedy and
agile it can also fight its corner
pretty well
it's definitely earned a point in the
fighting skills section
now it's time for the fight itself
titanoboa never swims in the open sea
but here
megalodon has gotten lost and ended up
in a shallow swampy area off the coast
of colombia
in water like this megladon finds it
even harder to move around
they could buy titanoboa just once and
the fight would be over
but because the shark moves so much
slower than the snake
for now he doesn't get the chance to
snap those enormous jaws
titanoboa starts attacking megalodon but
it can't do much damage to that thick
skin with its sharp but
very short teeth eventually meg ladon
gets its chance
and ends the fight with a single bite it
turns out that those huge teeth
were what really mattered in this
competition chew on that for a while